## **Writing endpoints for your Spring Boot application (MVC, REST, HTTP)**

This post focuses on understanding all the options that Spring Boot provides for us to create endpoints and build our API. If you are wondering how to create a REST API, or a MVC API, or just how to take complete control of the return HTTP when using Spring Boot, then this post should be of interest to you.

We also cover how to read the request and how to properly handle exceptions.

This post is meant to be read secuentially as new sections build on top of the previous ones.

You can find an list of all the tools we will cover under the **Conclusion** section.

### **Contents**
- **Prerequisites** *-> What you need to know*
- **Setting up your Spring Boot project** *-> Get a spring boot project running*
	- **The Spring Web dependency** *-> Why we added this dependency*
- **Understanding the final build** *-> Explaining the system we are going to code in*
- **The project structure** *-> A mention on where to place files*
- **The machine** *-> A comment on Spring Boot*
- **The basics** *-> Writing our first endpoint*
- **HTTP** *-> Writing endpoints for HTTP*
	- **The lower levels** *-> Accessing the response servlet*
	- **The Twilight zone** *-> Understanding order of precedence in servlet manipulation*
- **A RESTful approach** *-> Writing endpoints for REST*
- **MVC** *-> Writing endpoints for MVC*
    - **Templates** *-> Explaining templates*
    - **Thymeleaf: An example** *-> Explaining a Thymeleaf example*
    - **MVC Theory** *-> Explaining MVC*
    - **MVC Practice** *-> Implementing MVC*
    - **Returning static files** *-> A note on Spring's default behavior*
- **Handling exceptions** *-> Showing how to write exception handlers for endpoints*
- **Accessing the Request HTTP** *-> How to access request HTTP message*
    - **Reading from the URL** *-> Accessing query params and path variables*
    - **RequestEntity** *-> Accessing the whole request HTTP*
    - **@RequestBody and @RequestHeader** *-> Alternative way to HTTP request data*
	- **Request servlet** *-> Accessing the servlet request HTTP*
- **Order of precedence** *-> A comment on how Spring figures out an endpoint*
- **Conclusion** *-> Summary of learnt concepts*
	- **Annotations** *-> Annotations covered*
	- **Classes** *-> Classes covered*
	- **Exceptions** *-> Exceptions covered*
	- **Some Extra** *-> Some extra annotations*


### **Prerequisites**

You should know about REST, HTTP and MVC (although we will explain the latter one).

We also won't talk about what the Spring Framework is or how to use it. We may mention a couple of things here and there but you should be somewhat familiar with the Spring framework; beans, factories, IoC and all the rest.

What we aim to answer is how to go about when creating endpoints for a Spring Boot Web application. Getting to that starting point will mostly not be covered.


### **Setting up your Spring Boot project.**

You should already know how to get a Spring Boot project going, but just in case. Let's go over that part quickly.

You will want to use Spring's Initializr to get a project.

Spring Initializr is a tool that allows us to easily set up a Spring Boot project. It takes care of all the dependency and set up work for us.

- Go to https://start.spring.io/
- Select a project manager (I'll use Maven)
- Select a language (I'll use Java)
- Select the Spring Boot version
- Fill in the project metadata as you wish
- Select the packaging and then the Java version
- Finally you will also want to select the dependencies. We will add the `Spring Web` dependency which is what we will work with.
- OPTIONAL: You might want to add the `Spring Boot DevTools` dependency, it allows your server to automatically reload every time you change something inside `/resources`.

Once you download the files from there and open them up you should be good to go.


**The Spring Web dependency**

The reason we added the Spring Web dependency is because it brings a lot of new tools and functionality to our project, like:

- An embedded servlet container: By default is Tomcat.
- Spring MVC: All the tools needed to support the MVC model in Spring.
- Spring Web Annotations: Various useful annotations for when creating web applications with Spring Boot (`@Controller`, `@RESTController`, `@RequestMapping`, etc...)
- And more...


### **Understanding the final build**

When we create web applications with Java, we usually want to build something called a WAR (Web Application Archive), which contains all of our static files, our endpoints, our HTML/CSS/JS, all that. Now, our java code that contains our HTTP logic leverages what we call servlets, so you can think of our Java code as the servlet part of the WAR.

Once we have a WAR, we need to pass that into a program that can serve all we have there via HTTP. Those are called servers.

Not all servers work with servlet technology, so when a server can take in a WAR that uses servlets we call it a servlet container. Tomcat is such a program; it is an application that can serve things via HTTP, including WAR files that use servlet tech.

Traditionally, once you have yourself a WAR and a server application, you would want to install and configure the server app, then place the WAR in its corresponding place for the server app to see it and then run the server app.

Spring Boot does things differently. With Spring Boot you are not building a WAR, you are building a JAR instead, which is an executable application (assuming it has an entry point defined). More specifically, Spring Boot builds an Uber JAR: An Uber JAR (also known as fat JAR) is a JAR that contains all of its dependencies inside of it. This allows us to have all the code and tools we need under the same file.

When an application includes another application inside, we call that included application an embedded application. Spring Boot contains a server application inside (Tomcat by default). This allows Spring Boot to do its run-time autoconfiguration, which means that we won't have to worry about setting anything up.

The reason all of this matters is because it helps explain where many of the things we will work with come from: We will work with servlet code and we will be able to run a server without doing any configuration. Those are all parts of this machine, if you will, that we call a Spring Boot Web application.

As a side note, this is the difference between Spring projects:

- **Spring Boot Framework**: The core functionalities of Spring, available to your project: Beans, Factories, IoC...
- **Spring Boot application**: A Spring Framework project that is configured for you by Spring Initializr.
	- By default, it is set up to be an executable Uber JAR with dependencies included.
	- It contains a pre-defined set of dependencies needed for the application.
	- It has this auto-configuration at run-time feature where Spring loads and configures all the tools that are to be used in the application (Tomcat, Jackson, ...). It determines what tools to use based on the contents of the Uber JAR by scanning the included dependencies.
	- It follows the **convention over configuration** paradigm, like Maven. Which also means that initial configurations are opinionated.
- **Spring Boot Web application**: It is a Spring Boot application that has added the Spring Web dependency to it.
	- Adds an embedded server to the application (Tomcat by default).
	- Supports MVC
	- Provides tools for easy endpoint creation.


Other definitions of things we covered:

- **Servlet**: The tech we use in Java to create HTTP logic.
- **WAR**: A package that contains our servlet code, our HTML/JS/CSS and other media/resources related to our website. It is basically a web application container.
- **Server**: An application that is capable of handling HTTP requests/responses trough a network.
- **Servlet Container**: Is a server that can understand and work with servlet tech.
- **JAR**: A Java application (Assuming it has an entry point defined), else it could be just a library.
- **Embedded application**: An application that is contained inside another application. In our example that application is a server.
- **Convention over configuration (CoC) paradigm**: It means that instead of letting the user configure things, default configurations are provided. This allows us to get things up and running quickly, but we **MUST** know what those conventions are if we want to properly understand why the system works the way it does.


### **The project structure**

Just a quick mention: JS/HTML/CSS files and other media should go under `src/main/resources/static/` and templates (templated HTML for the MVC which we will explain later) should go under `src/main/resources/templates/`. I believe you can customize all this but by default that is where Spring will look for these things.


### **The machine**

When we write our endpoints in a Spring Boot application, we write to a **pre-built functioning system** that does not only provides us with some tools for us to use but also expects us to use them in a way that follows the system's rules. We are adding to an application that is **already in place and already configured** (Convention over Configuration). It is good to keep these things in mind when trying to make sense of where our options come from.


### **The basics**

We will start with the fundamentals. Let's say that we want **an endpoint to index**, and we want to return the string "Hello, World!" in the response body of the HTTP. With Spring, we would **use a method to define an endpoint**.

Let's start typing:

```
public class MyClass {
	
	public String index() {
		return "Hello, World!";
	}
}
```

There we have a class with a method. We want that method to represent an endpoint to index (/). For that, the first thing we need to do is to tell Spring that the `MyClass` class will be storing endpoints, so we use the `@Controller` annotation.

The `@Controller` annotation is a class level annotation that tells Spring that the annotated class should be scanned for endpoints:

```
@Controller
public class MyClass {
	
	public String index() {
		return "Hello, World!";
	}
}
```

We are still missing things. Spring may detect the `@Controller` class, but right now it cannot possibly identify `index()` as an endpoint. For that we need to use the `@RequestMapping` annotation.

The `@RequestMapping` annotation, when used on a method, tells Spring that the method is to be treated as an endpoint.

```
@Controller
public class MyClass {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
	public String index() {
		return "Hello, World!";
	}
}
```

As the code above shows, you can pass in the **path** and the HTTP **method** you want to work with to the `@RequestMapping` annotation.

This may look like it is good enough, and it is, but not for what we want. The way Spring is **configured** (CoC) is that unless specified, it will try to make sense of the code as if you were writing it with the MVC pattern in mind. So this is valid code for an MVC endpoint, but that is not what we are trying to do.

This is how Spring reads that code:
- The `@Controller` annotation signals to Spring that it should scan for endpoints inside of the labeled class.
- The `@RequestMapping` annotation marks the `index` method as an ednpoint. It maps it to the path `/` and the HTTP method `GET`.
- Spring now needs to figure out what kind of endpoint it is.
- Since there is no specification as to what kind of endpoint this is, Spring defaults to treat it as an MVC endpoint, and assumes we want to return a `View`.
- Spring will return the string "Hello, World!" to the **View Resolver** (more on it in the MVC section), which will throw an error because the `View` "Hello, World!" doesn't exist.


In order for us to let Spring know that our return value is meant to be inside the HTTP response's body, we need to add the `@ResponseBody` annotation to our method.

```
@Controller
public class MyClass {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
	@ResponseBody
	public String index() {
		return "Hello, World!";
	}
}
```

The `@ResponseBody` annotation is a class and method level annotation. When used on a method like on this example, it tells Spring that the return value of this method is to be **serialized** into the HTTP response's body.

This will work as we indented it.

You might have noticed however, that with these tools, we have little to no control over the HTTP data other than the body. Let's work on that next.


### **HTTP**

We are going to create a new endpoint. This time the objective is to create and send our own HTTP response message.

The first thing we need is a `@Controller`, because that tells Spring that the specified class holds endpoints.

Then for each endpoint we need to use the `@RequestMapping`, because that tells Spring which methods are the endpoints and it also links them with a path and a method.

After that, we need to tell Sping that we want to return an HTTP message object. For that, Spring has a class called `ResponseEntity<T>`.

`ResponseEntity<T>` is the class that represents your HTTP response. There you can handle the headers and the body of the response.

The generic type in the `ResponseEntity<T>` defines the type of the body. If it is `String`, then you will pass a string into the body. If it is a class, then you can pass an instance of that type, and Spring will **serialize it into the response body**. By default, Spring will serialize objects to **JSON**, but this behavior can be customized. For example, you can configure Spring to serialize objects to XML instead of JSON.

With that, we have all the pieces we need: We are telling Spring where to look for endpoints with `@Controller`, we are also telling it who the endpoints are with `@RequestMapping` and finally by using `ResponseEntity<T>` as the return type of the endpoint we are telling it that we want to return a whole HTTP message.

Let's see it in code:

```
@Controller
public class MyClass {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
	public ResponseEntity<String> index() {
		. . .
	}
}
```

Now all that is left is to actually create that HTTP response that we want to send out. For that all we have to do is to create and fill our instance of `ResponseEntity<T>`:

```
@Controller
public class MyClass {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
	public ResponseEntity<String> index() {
		String str = "Hello, World!";

		HttpHeaders headers = new HttpHeaders();
		headers.add("my-header", "my-value");
	
		return new ResponseEntity<String>(str, headers, HttpStatus.OK);
	}
}
```

Note the following:

- `ResponseEntity<T>` is a **immutable** type, so all elements you whish to add to it must be passed to its constructor (body, headers, status code).
- For the headers, `ResponseEntity<T>` takes in an `HttpHeaders` object that comprises a bunch of headers. Do not confuse this type with a Jakarta type of the same name, this is a Spring type.
- You don't need to worry about adding boilerplate headers like `Content-Length`.

Alternatively, we can use ResponseEntity's static methods for common responses like 200 OK. The following code achieves a similar result than the previous one:

```
@Controller
public class MyClass {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
	public ResponseEntity<String> index() {
	    String str = "Hello, World!";
	    
		return ResponseEntity.ok(str);
	}
}
```

Note that in this case we have **no way of adding a header**. These methos are meant to create quick response HTTP objects and only allow you to pass in the body contents.

Other methods include: `.notFound()`, `created()`, etc...


**The lower levels**

`ResponseEntity<T>` is a tool that Spring provides to us to manage the response servlet, which is Java's solution for managing an HTTP response message. However we can completely skip the `ResponseEntity<T>` API and directly interact with the servlet object if we so wish to.

To access this lower level tool, we just need to add `HttpServletResponse` to the endpoint's parameters.

Let's try recreating the previous endpoint with `HttpServletResponse`:

```
@RequestMapping(path = "/", method = RequestMethod.GET)
public void index(HttpServletResponse response) throws IOException {
	String str = "Hello, World!";
	response.setStatus(HttpServletResponse.SC_OK);
	response.setHeader("my-header", "my-value");
	response.setContentType("text/plain");
	response.getWriter().write(str);
}
```

Notice the following:

- No need to return anything.
- You have total control of the HTTP contents. Just like with `ResponseEntity<T>`.
- If you want to write to the body, you will have to handle an IOException.
- There is no `<T>` here, nor automatic object-to-JSON serialization into the body, so you will be responsible for headers like "Content-Type" and the serialization of content going into the HTTP body.
- A more "closer to the metal" approach of doing the same thing.

If your endpoint is constructing a whole response HTTP message, then I really don't see why you would take this approach. But if that isn't the case, then this may come in handy. We will see examples of how this knowledge can be useful later on (MVC, REST).


**The Twilight zone**

When it comes to how to create and manage HTTP responses, we now know that what we are working with under the hood is servlets, and Spring's `ResponseEntity<T>` is our interface to them. But we just saw that we can also access the servlets themselves. Which makes it so the endpoint's method becomes this space where we have two APIs for the same thing. It is like two layers intertwining at this specific point (hence the name of the section).

On top of that we also have annotations. Spring provides some annotations that also modify the response servlet, like `@ResponseStatus` and `@ResponseBody`.

`@ResponseStatus` is an annotation that allows us to specify the default status code that the endpoint should return. If we do not specify a response status anywhere in our endpoint, it defaults to **200 OK**.

I think it is unlikely that you would need to use all of these things on the same endpoint, I can't imagine a scenario like that. But because it is possible, I believe it is important to know how the precedence order between all these elements work.

To put it simply:
- **Body**: *ResponseEntity **||** Annotations **||** HttpServletResponse*
	- An error is thrown if you try to modify the body's content with more than one medium (`getWriter() has already been called for this response`).
- **Headers**: *ResponseEntity **+** HttpServletResponse*
	- Both headers make it to the HTTP response.
- **Status code**: *ResponseEntity **>** Annotations **>** HttpServletResponse*
	- The one with the highest priority gets to make it to the HTTP response.

Let's look at an example:

```
@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.ALREADY_REPORTED)
public ResponseEntity<String> index(HttpServletResponse res) throws IOException {

	res.addHeader("Servlet-Header", "Servlet-data");
	res.getWriter().write("Servlet to body");
	res.setStatus(HttpServletResponse.SC_ACCEPTED);
	
	HttpHeaders entityHeaders = new HttpHeaders();
	entityHeaders.add("Entity-Header", "Entity-data");

	return new ResponseEntity<String>("Entity to body", entityHeaders, HttpStatus.CREATED);
}
```

On the example above we have the following:
- A `@ResponseStatus` annotation setting the default status code to: 206 (ALREADY_REPORTED)
- A `HttpServletResponse` that sets the status code to: 202 (ACCEPTED)
- A `ResponseEntity` that sets the status code to: 201 (CREATED)
- A `HttpServletResponse` writing to the body
- A `HttpServletResponse` adding a header
- A `ResponseEntity` writing to the body
- A `ResponseEntity` adding a header


What will the header and the body contain and what will the status code be?

We will get an error. Because we cannot write to the body from both the servlet and the response entity object. We need to pick one.

What if we comment out the `res.getWriter().write("Servlet to body");` line? Will we get anything?

Yes, we get an HTTP response that contains the following:
- Status code: 201 (CREATED) as per the `ResponseEntity`
- Headers: **both** headers are added
- Body: The body as defined in the `ResponseEntity`


### **A RESTful approach**

The main thing we need to find for a nice REST API experience is a solution to JSONifying the response.

We have already mentioned how to achieve this a couple of different ways:
- With `ResponseEntity<T>`, you can pass any object to the body and it will get serialized into JSON. Note you need to specify the type by using the generic type `T`. You can use `<?>` if you want to resolve the type at run-time.
- With `@ResponseBody`, you are instructing Spring to treat the endpoint's return value as something that needs to be serialized into the response body as a JSON.

However, if that wasn't enough, Spring even provides us with a custom controller to help us write these REST endpoints: `@RestController`.

`@RestController` is a class level annotation that combines `@Controller` and `@ResponseBody`. This ensures that every endpoint we define inside this class is to be treated by Spring as an endpoint that returns a value to be saved inside the response body.

Now all we need to do is to also add in `@ResponseStatus` and we should be good to go. That should solve most of our REST needs:

```
@RestController
public class MyClass {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
	@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
	public Animal index() {
		Animal a = new Animal("Cow");
		return a;
	}
}
```

Let's go over what is happening:

- By using `@RestController`, Spring knows that the class is a controller and that all its endpoints, unless specified otherwise (For example, returning a `ResponseEntity<T>` takes precedence over `@ResponseBody` for that method), are to return what is to be serialized into the body of the HTTP response.
- Spring can identify the endpoint because of the `@RequestMapping`.
- Spring knows what status code to use by default thanks to `@ResponseStatus`.


That should be good enough. But if we ever find ourselves in a position where we need to manage some headers (**Cache-Control** for example) or resolve the status code at run-time, we can always throw an `HttpServletResponse` in there.

```
@RestController
public class MyClass {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.GET)
	public Animal index(HttpServletResponse response) {

		response.setStatus(HttpServletResponse.SC_CREATED);
		response.setHeader("my-header", "my-value");

		Animal a = new Animal("Cow");
		return a;
	}
}
```

**Note the following**:
- In order for us to let the servlet have control over the status code, we removed the higher precedence `@ResponseStatus` annotation. If we forget to do this we may run into a senseless debugging session.


### **MVC**

This is the most complicated of the three ways of structuring the API. The other two were straight forward but for this one we need to know about the MVC model and also what templates are. So let's go over it quickly.


**Templates**

When we talk about templates in this context, we mean templated HTML. That is HTML that has some syntax within that is not HTML, but rather syntax that is there to represent placeholders.

With HTML, the syntax we use to add these placeholders comes from "templating engines". In Spring Boot there is no default templating engine, you have to add your own.

We will add Thymeleaf as the templating engine. All we have to do is to go to **Initializr**, search it up and add it to our project. Spring will take care of the condiguration for us.

The following code adds it to a Maven project which is what I'm using.

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-thymeleaf</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

**Thymeleaf: An example**

Take a look at this code:

```
<h1>Some text here, Hi</h1>
<p th:text="'Hello, ' + ${user?.name ?: 'User'} + '!'"></p>
```

That is a valid Thymeleaf templated HTML file.

Here is how we are using Thymeleaf in that code:

- **th:text**: This is a thymeleaf property, it means that on the text area of this tag we will assign some text.
- **"'Hello, ' + ${user?.name ?: 'User'} + '!'"**: This is the text we assign. If user is provided and name exists we go with "Hello, [user.name]!", else if one of the two perviously mentioned conditions is not met we go with "Hello, User!"

When saving a template, make sure you do so under `src/main/resources/templates/` and make sure you save it as **.html**.


**MVC Theory**

In MVC, we have three main components: Controller, Model and View.

- **Controller**: This we have seen it before, it is literally the `@Controller` class. Is where the endpoints are.
- **View**: These are the temaplted HTML files in our project, like the one we just saw.
- **Model**: This is just a class with some fields plus getter and setter methods so that Spring can manipulate them. We will create one later.

When you have templated HTML, you usually have so because you want to generate some HTML from it by combining that template with some data. The data comes from something called a **model** in MVC.

For example in the templated HTML we that showed earlier you could see we had something called `user`, and that `user` had a property called `name`. The `user` element would be the model. That templated HTML is dependent on that `user` model.

The flow of MVC goes like this:

- You get an HTTP request to the Controller.
- The Controller has to do two things now: Create a model object and decide on a template to use.
- Once the controller has the data (the model object) and knows which template to use, it must convey that information to the **View resolver**.
- A **View resolver** (provided by Spring Boot in this case) takes the given information (the Model/data and the Wiew) and creates the final HTML text that is to be send back to the client.


**MVC Practice**

Let's see the MVC in code, starting with a Model:

- To create a model we use a class. Note that we don't really need to add any annotation to the model class.
- We use getters for our fields so that Spring's View resolver can properly access the model's data when creating the final HTML.
- The getters must follow the camel case syntax with the pattern: getVariablename().

A small mention on what the Model class is for: It is supposed to represent a record in a database. In theory, in your endpoint, you will most likely want to interact with a database, and having a class that represents a record makes things easier to read and work with. It also becomes very convenient when using Java's JPA (Java Persistence API) or Spring Data JPA, which is beyond the scope of this post.

Now let's see what a Model looks like:

```
public class User {
	private String name;
	public User(String name) {this.name = name;}
	public String getName() {return name;}
}
```

With that Model in place, let's make sure that we have some Views to make use of it:
- Make sure you have Thymeleaf or any other templating engine properly set up.
- Create a templated HTML file and place it inside the `src/main/resources/templates/` directory.
- Remember the name of the file as that will be how we will identify it in code.
- That's it. A View is how we refer to a templated HTML file in code.

Finally, we go over the Controller. Just like with HTTP, when dealing with MVC we have several ways to write the same thing.

Let's first explain the **simple approach**:

```
@Controller
public class MyController {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.POST)
	@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
	public String index(Model model) {
		User u = new User("Jeff");
		model.addAttribute("user", u);
		
		return "user_view";
	}
}
```

Let's explain that code:

- Our endpoint is set to return a String. This string is to be the name of the view. Remember what we return here will go over to a View resolver, not the client.
- We add a parameter to our endpoint. It is called `Model` but it is more like a model container; you can add any number of models you want to it as attributes. We do that with the `addAttribute` method.
- The string in the `addAttribute` method defines the name to which we can refer to that `u` object in our templated HTML. This example is compatible with the templated HTML code we posted earlier (assuming we saved that tempalte as "user_view.html" inside the `src/main/resources/templates/` directory).


Now let's go over the slightly more **complex approach**:

```
@Controller
public class MyController {

	@RequestMapping(path="/", method=RequestMethod.POST)
	@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
	public ModelAndView index() {
		ModelAndView maw = new ModelAndView();
		User u = new User("Jeff");
		
		maw.setViewName("user_view");
		maw.addObject("user", u);
		
		return maw;
	}
}
```

I personally like this approach the most. It is more lengthy to write but to me it makes the code clearer:

- Instead of a `Model` class that you need to remember to add to the method's parameters, we have a `ModelAndView` object that we instantiate.
- Instead of having to remember that we need to return a `String` that is to be the view name, we return the `ModelAndView` object we created.
- We just need to remember `ModelAndView`.

**Returning static files**

As a note, you can do `www.page.com/subfolder/index.html` on your browser and it will work. Meaning unless you configure it otherwise, people can access anything you have by just typing the correct path.

There are security dependencies out there to handle this behavior.

### **Handling exceptions**

Endpoints are not the only kind of methods that can go in a `@Controller` class. We can also have exception handlers that return things back to the client.

```
@ExceptionHandler(SomeException.class)
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR)
public ResponseEntity<String> someExceptionHandler(SomeException ex) {
	. . .
}
```

You know most of the code there. The only new thing is the `@ExceptionHandler` annotation. This annotation takes in an exception class. Whenever an endpoint throws such an exception, this method takes over. Note that an argument of the exception type is provided and will be populated with the thrown exception when the method is called.

Let's look at an example.

Here is a RESTful API with one endpoint and one exception handler:

```
@RestController
public class MyRestController {

    @ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
    @RequestMapping(path="/animal", method=RequestMethod.POST)
    public Animal createAnimal() throws AnimalNotCreatedException {
        // some code here to attempt and create the animal
        if(animal != null) {
            return animal;
        }

        throw new AnimalNotCreatedException("Oh no, we couldn't create the animal");
    }

    @ExceptionHandler(AnimalNotCreatedException.class)
    @ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR)
    public String errorCreatingAnimal(AnimalNotCreatedException ex) {
        return ex.getMessage();
    }
}
```

This is how the execution would go if the `animal` is null:
- The `createAnimal()` endpoint runs into a null `animal` and throws and exception: `AnimalNotCreatedException`.
- The control flow passes to the exception handler endpoint `errorCreatingAnimal()` because the `@ExceptionHandler` tells Spring that this method is to take care of such exceptions.
- The exception handler endpoint can access the thrown exception via method parameter.
- The exception handler endpoint returns an HTTP message with INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR as the status code and the message of the exception in the body (remember this exception is under a `@RestController` class, so unless we return `ResponseEntity<T>`, Spring will treat the return value as the body contents)

To my understanding, this is a popular way of dealing with **status code changes** in your endpoints.


### **Accessing the request HTTP**

This is the last stop. There is only one more thing we need to cover: How to retrieve data from the request HTTP message.

There are many ways to do this. We will divide them into four sections:
- **Reading from the URL**: We will see how to retrieve **path variables** and **query parameters** from the URL.
- **RequestEntity**: We will cover how to retrieve the request headers and body using `RequestEntity<T>`.
- **@RequestBody and @RequestHeader**: We will also show how to use these to retrieve the request body, and/or the headers in a one by one basis.
- **Request servlet**: We will also show how to retrieve the underlying request servlet.


**Reading from the URL**

- Here is how you would format a path that contains a path variable: `/animal/{id}`.
- And in case you forgot, this is what query parameters look like: `path?query1=param1&query2=param2`

Let's see an example with two annotations. One that deals with path variables and another one that deals with query parameters:


```
// path variables
@RequestMapping(path="/animals/{id}", method=RequestMethod.GET)
public Animal getAnimal(@PathVariable("id") String id) {
    ...
}
// query parameters
@RequestMapping(path="/somePath", method=RequestMethod.GET)
public Animal someEndpoint(@RequestParam(value="opt", required=false, defaultValue="sup") String opt,
                        @RequestParam(value="req", required=true) String req) {
    ...
}
```

**With path variables, you**:
- Use the variable-level annotation `@PathVariable` that takes in the name of the variable as you specified it on the `@RequestMapping` path.
- You can use a `String`, an `int` or similar.

**With query parameters, you**:
- Use the variable-level annotation `@RequestParam` that takes in several arguments:
    - "value" is for the name of the query.
    - "required" specifies if the query must be present or not.
    - "defaultValue" gives a default value. This is only for non-required queries.
- When a required parameter is not provided, a `MissingServletRequestParameterException` exception is thrown.


**RequestEntity**

Retrieving the request HTTP via `RequestEntity<T>` is really simple. You just add it to the endpoint's parameters.

```
@RequestMapping(path="/somePath", method = RequestMethod.POST)
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
@ResponseBody
public String someEndpoint(RequestEntity<Animal> req) {

    Animal a = req.getBody();

    String header = req.getHeaders().getFirst("My-Header");

    return a.getName() + ", " + header;
}
```

**Notice the following**:
- We can use the RequestEntity's generic type to serialize the request body into a compatible variable (assuming the request body is a proper and compatible JSON).
- We cannot use `<?>` in this scenario as far as I know.
- If you want Spring to deserialize the JSON into your object, make sure your type has a **parameterless constructor** defined.
- You also need the gettters and setters for your object fields.


**@RequestBody and @RequestHeader**

If all you want is to get the HTTP body or a speciffic header, you can use `@RequestBody` and/or `@Requestheader`.

```
// body
@RequestMapping(path="/somePath", method=RequestMethod.POST)
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
public String someEndpoint(@RequestBody Animal body) {
    ...
}

// header
@RequestMapping(path="/anotherPath", method=RequestMethod.POST)
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
public String anotherEndpoint(@RequestHeader("My-Header") String header) {
    ...
}
```

For `@RequestBody`:

- Notice how if the request body is a JSON and you have a type that can store it, you can use that type as the variable's and Spring will populate it for you.

**Request servlet**

We do this the exact same way we did to ge the `HttpServletResponse` object. We add it to our endpoint parameters:

```
@RequestMapping(path="/somePath", method=RequestMethod.POST)
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
public String someEndpoint(HttpServletRequest request) throws IOException{
	String bodyLine = request.getReader().readLine();

	String header = request.getHeader("My-Header");

	return "Header value: " + header + ", body's line 1: " + bodyLine;
}
```

Note that you may have to deal with an `IOException` if you plan on reading from the body.

### **Order of precedence**

We talked about the order of precedence when it came to editing the underlying servlet object earlier on. But there is another order of precedence that has to do with **endpoint definition**. Meaning that whenever Spring is trying to figure out an endpoint, it will follow an order:

- *ResponseEntity/ModelAndView* **>** *Annotations* **>** *MVC*

	- **ResponseEntity/ModelAndView**: They are exlusive as you can only return one. Whenever you are returning one of these, whatever you else you have (like `@ResponseBody`) wont count.
	- **Annotations**: Next we have annotations like `@ResponseBody`.
	- **MVC**: Finally, if there is no specification at all on what kind of endpoint it is, Spring will treat the enpoint as an MVC endpoint.

### **Conclusion**
Below is a list of all the elements we have covered in this post.

**Annotations**
- `@Controller`: Class-level. Tells Spring the class is a controller.
- `@RestController`: Class-level. Combines `@Controller` and `@ResponseBody`.
- `@ResponseBody`: Class/Method-level. Tells Spring the return value is to be serialized into the response HTTP body.
- `@RequestMapping`: Class/Method-level (we only covered method-level). Lets Spring know the path and HTTP verb the designated endpoint is to work with.
- `@ResponseStatus`: Method-level. Tells Spring what status code to return with the response HTTP.
- `@ExceptionHandler`: Method-level. Tells Spring the method should catch the specified Exception and take control from there.
- `@RequestBody`: Field-level. Tells Spring to try to deserialize the request body into the designated variable.
- `@RequestHeader`: Field-level. Tells Spring to populate designated variable with value of the specified header.
- `@RequestParam`: Field-level. Substracts a query parameter (`?query=param`) from the URL.
- `@PathVariable`: Field-level. Substracts a path variable (`index/{var}/etc`) from the URL.

**Classes**
- `ResponseEntity<T>`: Represents the response HTTP message.
- `RequestEntity<T>`: Represents the request HTTP message.
- `HttpServletRequest`: Represents the servlet request object.
- `HttpServletResponse`: Represents the servlet response object.
- `ModelAndView`: Allows you to add models and set the view all in one place.
- `Model`: Allows you to add models.
- `HttpHeaders`: Represents a collection of headers. Used when passing headers to a `ResponseEntity<T>` object.

**Exceptions**
- `MissingServletRequestParameterException`: Thrown if a required query parameter is not provided.

**Some extra**
- `@GetMapping`: Is `@RequestMapping` but the method is already set to GET.
- `@PostMapping`: ^
- `@DeleteMapping`: ^
- etc...