Vitejs Case study - Differences between import statements (ES6) and fetch/http requests within the public/ and src/ contexts.

While making my portfolio website, I realized that I needed a way to properly manage my data. I wanted to be able to easily create and change content for it without having the re-bundle and re-deploy my web application. It was while looking for answers to this problem that I got trapped in this little rabbithole of import/fetch and the correct usage of public/, src/ and src/assets/, all within a Vitejs context.

We will first talk about each concept separately (but still within the Vitejs context) and then we will see how they all work together: import, fetch, Vitejs bundling process, Vitejs directories.

**Import statements:**
When importing, what you are doing is telling Vitejs "Hey, get me this or that resource here" (now, depending on the format and plugins you might have, the how you get the content there and what exacly you end up getting differs, but that doesnt really matter for us, and if you want to have a mental image of this, we can assume we get it by basically copying the data from |source| and pasting it on |destination|).

Within a Vitejs application, **all import statements are resolved at bundling**, the browser does not handle those, the server does not handle those, Vitejs handles them all.

If you were to be using vanilla JS/CSS/HTML and no bundler, and you happened to have an import statement inside your JS file. The browser would see that when first running the code after downloading it (this is another topic altogether) and inmediately ask the server for it. Meaning that **you would initiate a fetch request for each of those import statements** *(unless you manually include dependencies in the HTML body and in the correct order, but you get the idea)*. But bundlers like Vitejs "bundle" things so that the initial request already contains all needed files.

So, within a Vitejs context, using an import statement means no fetching. You can check this if you build your application and run it on the dev server:

```
npm run build --> build the app
npm run preview --> serve the build
```

After that, go to the network tab in your browser's dev tools, and check if you see any http request for your import statements. You will find none, because the code the host is serving is an already bundled code, and all import statements have already been resolved.

Funily enough, you can also check the opposite if you run the dev code and not the production/bundled code. If you do that you will in fact be able to see fetch requests for import statements, because you will be running un-optimized code, code that has been transalted to vanilla JS/CSS/HTML but not optimized, which gets to show you an example of how would a traditional/un-bundled js code run on a client.

To run your project un-optimized:

```
npm run dev --> runs un-optimized code
```

**What bundling does** is to rename all variables and re-organize and mix files together in order to create the most compact and efficient package possible.

**Bundling, import statements, project structure and data:**
Now lets try to understand what all of these means for your project structure and data management for a moment.

Vitejs bundles the code that is in the `src/` directory, changing names, locations and files all around. This means that you cannot really add to it in any way after that because you have no way of referencing anything in there anymore.

Now, that is not the full picture isnt it? What if you are importing from outside the `src/` directory? You can do that after all... Well, in that case Vitejs will get the data from wherever you are pointing at with that import statement, meaning it will **COPY** it onto where the import statement is located, which is a file inside the `src/` directory somewhere, and then bundle it. Do you see what that means? It means that if once you do that, you change wathever file you where importing originally, it will have on effect at all because Vitejs already solved its import problem and already bundled the code, the browser will not import that file on its own either because the bundled code will contain no import statements when being sent tothe browser.

So, if we cannot really use import for content that we want to change frequently, or add to, or do anything with. Then what can we do...

Fetch.

Now, before moving on to fetch, two things: a mention of `src/assets/` and a really cool way of thinking about bundling that I just came up with, youre gonna love it, believe me.

Contrary to what it sounds like, data inside the `src/` directory is not uncommon, there is a special folder for it actually, its the `src/assets/` directory. But that is not the place for data that is prompt to edits for the aforementioned reasons. That is the place for data **that you absolutely need to be sent to the client on the initial request, and that you know you wont need to change.**

Now onto the cool bundling analogy:

You can think of bundling as compiling, but to the browser/V5 engine. Instead of going from source code on a language onto machine code for a speciffic CPU architecture/intruction set, you go from JSX/Typescript kind of sugar to good ol' Javascript/HTML/CSS. In this analogy, `Importing` is just like **static** linking, once you link it its done, it stays there, is part of the binary.

### Fetch time:
Fetching is basically you requesting some data at runtime, asynchronously (I imagine you can do http requests synchronously, but only weirdos do that and the fetch API does it async anyways).






**So, what does all this means for your project structure?**

It means that the stuff that you put inside your src/ directory you better make sure you wont need to modify it often, because modifying it means having to re-bundle, meaning re-deploying. So unless you want to take your server offline every time you make a change on that imported content, you need to find another way of "importing" data.

As a final note on importing in Vitejs, you can import from anywhere within your project, public/, src/, it doesnt matter (note its not recommended, more on it later). We can safely assume why as well: We have access to the whole project, including the original layout of the src/ directory, because we are going to execute those imports pre-bundling, in our development environments. I bet we could import files from our desktop or our downloads folder assuming we have the patience to type down the whole path.

**Positives:**

- Avoid unnecesary http requests on the server by conveniently serving all needed files on the initial request.
- No restrictions on where those files should go in the project.

**Negatives:**

- You need those files to bundle your app. If the file is not found you will get a bundling error.
- Modifying the import files means re-bundling, re-deploying.

**Use case scenarios:**

- The most common place to use this is with source files (code files). You have this javascript file that needs to call a couple of functions that are commonly used all over your app. So you make a file just for those commonly used functions (tools.js), and then whenever you want to use any of those functions elsewhere you import the file. This ensures that the files that need those functions will always have access to it.

- Another case, which is what prompted me to learn about all this in the first time is this one:

    You have a connection error message with some text, and you want to always know that the text of that error message is availible within the initial request, because you will use it to display an error message if any fetch request goes wrong. But you also want to separate the text from the component (im using React), so you can have the text in a .json file, and import the json file onto your component. This will make sure that the error message content is always ready to go. Now in this case this means that if I want to change the error message Ill have to re-bundle & re-deploy but I dont plan on doing so Im just saying "hey refresh pls", so Ill take the risk there.

- If that last case seemed a bit to weird/nonsensical (I get why dw) you can think of it as this: Lets say you need some content, some data, some file... wathever it is, ready to go within the initial request, but you also want to keep it in its own file. You use `import` then (remember, this is within a Vitejs app context).


**Now lets go over fetch requests:**

Fetch requests are basically you requesting some data at runtime, asynchronously (I imagine you can do http requests synchronously, but the fetch API does it async). Also, I haven't mentioned this but obviously imports are not async, there is no such a concept in importing as far as I know.

So what does it mean requesting data at runtime? It means requesting data as your code is executing, live. Which means, if you think about it, that the browser is the one dealing with it, not Vite, not your PC, the client's browser.

Since the browser is dealing with it, the path that we need to provide for that file we want must be accessible post-bundling, which is why you cannot fetch anything inside the src/ directory, and heres the explanation for that:

Bundling in Vitejs (and I assume most bundlers), involves renaming files, moving files around, copying and pasting here and there. This obviously results in a completely different src/ directory than the one you have access to pre-bundling. So there is no way for you to know the name of a file after all those changes and, even so, will the file still contain what it originally contained? Probably not. That is why fetching to the src/ directory is not only not recommened but not possible, you will get undefined behavior (in my case I always got back my index.html file even if I asked for a non-existent file)


**So, what does all this means for your project structure?**

It means that if you have change-sensitive content, you should place it inside the public/ directory, because your build doesnt care about whats going on inside that directory.


**Positives:**

- Allows you to access content at runtime.
- Doesn't matter if what you are asking for changes in any way, as long as your code knows how to handle that, it will always work and you wont need to re-bundle anything.

**Negatives:**

- If you need content availible on the first response, you cannot use this.
- Each time you ask for the data you are starting an http request, which puts work on the server you ask to.


### **Dos and donts (plus the whys)**
Just to cement a bit all that content, lets go over some dos and donts and explain their whys.

**Fetching:**

- **Fetching a file that lives in the src/ directory:**

    - Veredict: **DONT** - You cannot do it, it will throw an error saying the file doesnt exist.
    - Why: Vitejs bundles the contents of src/, this involves a lot of moving code around, renaming things, copy and pasting things here and there.
    
        If you try to fetch something it means you want to ask for a file at **runtime**, so unless you have the correct path to it, which you wont because Vitejs will rename all content in src/ and change it all around, you cannot possibly ask for it.
- **Fetching a file that lives in the public/ directory:**
    - Veredict: **DO** - You can do it and as far as I know its common practice.
    - Why: Files in the public/ directory are not subject to Vitejs bunlding process, their names, location and their content will always remain the same, so you know where they will be at all times.
- **Importing a file that lives in the src/ directory:**
    - Veredict: **DO** - Common practice for source files (code), for static files use the assets/ subfolder (not required but Vitejs bundles better that way)
    - Why: All import statements are solved pre bundling.
- **Importing a file that lives in the public/ directory:**
    - Veredict: **DO(NT)** - You can do it, but you should use the src/assets/ directory.
    - Why: Even tho its perfectly fine to do so, Vitejs recommends to use the src/assets/ directory for a better bundling, I assume it helps them optimize for such cases (Imagine they cant really rename it if its outside the src/ directory for example, this seems trivial but it stacks).
